## 5. Detailed method

### 5.1 QCArchive data generation and archiving
The MolSSI QCArchive [@doi:10.1063/1.5052551] project is a platform for computing, organizing, and sharing quantum chemistry data.
Computations with this platform automatically record all input and output quantities ensuring the reproducibility of all computations involved.
In the case of computing with the MolSSI QCArchive instances, all data is automatically hosted and can be queried using the platform.

#### 5.1.1 Submitting computations to QCArchive

All scripts used to submit calculations for the datasets in this paper are in the [`qca-dataset-submission`](https://github.com/openforcefield/qca-dataset-submission) GitHub repo.
The submission scripts used for the kinase inhibitor and subsituted phenyl datasets are listed below.

- [Kinase inhibitor dataset](https://github.com/openforcefield/qca-dataset-submission/tree/master/2019-11-27-kinase-inhibitor-optimization)
- [Subsituted phenyl dataset](https://github.com/openforcefield/qca-dataset-submission/tree/master/2019-07-25-phenyl-set)

#### 5.1.2 Details on QC and MM torsion scans.

All torsion scans were computed with the TorsionDrive [@url:https://github.com/lpwgroup/torsiondrive] project, which makes choices of new constrained optimizations to evaluate.
The required constrained optimizations were then computed with the geomeTRIC [@url:https://github.com/leeping/geomeTRIC] standalone geometry optimizer interfaced to the QCEngine [@url:https://github.com/molssi/qcengine] project.

To ensure a fair comparison between the QC and MM torsion scans, the only change in the torsion scan procedure was to switch out the program, which evaluated the gradient at each step in the geomeTRIC optimization.
For QC, gradients were computed at B3LYP-D3(BJ) / DZVP with the Psi4 [@doi:10.1021/acs.jctc.7b00174] program.
Our choice of quantum chemical level of theory and basis set was based on benchmarks of quantum chemistry and density functional methods for the accuracy of conformational energies, such as [@doi:10.1021/acs.jctc.5b01066, @doi:10.1021/acs.jctc.7b01074, @doi:10.1039/C7CP04913G].
In these studies it was generally observed that B3LYP-D3(BJ) which includes an empirical dispersion correction [@doi:10.1063/1.2795701, @doi:10.1002/jcc.21759] is roughly equivalent to MP2 and the wB97X-V functional with nonlocal dispersion [@doi:10.1039/C3CP54374A] in terms of accuracy for conformational energies of small molecules (<30 heavy atoms) in the complete basis set limit, i.e. 0.3-0.4 kcal/mol vs. CCSD(T)/CBS gold standard calculations.
Remarkably, when using the DZVP basis set [@doi:10.1139/v92-079] which is equivalent to 6-31G* in size and was optimized for DFT calculations, the accuracy of conformational energy calculations was unchanged compared to the much larger def2-TZVPD and def2-QZVP basis sets[@doi:10.1039/B508541A].
After verification of the published results locally, we chose B3LYP-D3(BJ)/DZVP as the QM method of choice for torsion drives.
For molecular mechanics, gradients were run using OpenMM [@doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005659] with the OpenFF parsley Force Field (v1.0.0) [@doi:10.5281/zenodo.3483227].

### 5.2 Calculating Bond orders


#### 5.2.1 AM1 WBO and AM1 ELF10 WBO
To calculate AM1 ELF10 WBO, we used OpenEye's QUACPAC toolkit [@url:https://www.eyesopen.com/quacpac] (OpenEye version 2019.Apr.2). The
ELF10 WBO comes along free after an AM1-BCC charge fitting procedure. For ELF10 WBOs generated in this paper, we used the `get_charges` function
in the `chemi.py` module in `fragmenter` versions v0.0.3 and v0.0.4. To calculate AM1 WBO for individual conformers, we used the `OEAssignPartialCharges`
with the `OECharges_AM1BCCSym` option from the QUACPAC toolkit for each conformer generated with Omega [@url:https://www.eyesopen.com/omega] (OpenEye version 2019.Apr.2)
which is called for the `get_charges` function.
For AM1 WBOs calculated to verify the results from the validation set, we generated conformers using the `generate_grid_conformer` function in the `chemi.py` module in `fragmenter` version v0.0.6.

We noticed that AM1 ELF10 WBOs can differ significantly across platforms (Linux vs Mac OS) for triple bonds. All results in this paper were calculated on a Linux machine. The
results might be different on a Mac OS.

#### 5.2.2 Wiberg Bond Orders in Psi4

Wiberg-Löwdin bond orders are calculated in Psi4 with the keyword `scf_properties: wiberg_lowdin_indices` using Psi4 version 1.3. All bond orders were computed during the torsion scan computations.

### 5.3 Datasets

#### 5.3.1 Kinase inhibitor dataset
The kinase inhibitor dataset consists of 43 FDA approved kinase inhibitors (smi files is in the SI) with their Omega generated conformers (OpenEye veriso 2019.Apr.2, `generate_conformers`
function in the `chemi.py` module in `fragmenter` version v0.0.4). AM1 WBOs were calculated as described above, for all conformers of all 43 kinase inhibitors. B3LYP-D3(BJ) / DZVP Wiberg-Löwdin
bond orders were calculated for 9 kinase inhibitors and Omega generated conformers after a B3LYP-D3P(BJ) / DZVP geometry optimization. The DFT results are available on QCArchive
as an `OptimizationDataset` named `Kinase Inhibitors: WBO Distributions`.

The variance of the WBO distributions were calculated using the `numpy` [@doi:10.1109/MCSE.2011.37] `var` function version 1.16.2 and their confidence intervals were calculated using arch `IIDBootsrap` function [@doi:10.5281/zenodo.2613877] version 4.8.1.
To calculate the correlation matrix, we calculated the Pearson correlation coefficient with the `numpy` [@doi:10.1109/MCSE.2011.37] `corrcoef` function version 1.16.2.
Scripts and data used to generate and analyze this dataset are in
[github.com/choderalab/fragmenter_data/manuscript-figures/kinase_inhibitors_wbos](https://github.com/choderalab/fragmenter_data/tree/master/manuscript-figures/kinase_inhibitors_wbos)

#### 5.3.2 Subsituted phenyl dataset
The substituted phenyl dataset consists of 3,458 substituted phenyl molecules where the substituents chosen to span a large range of electron donating and withdrawing groups.
We arrived at 3,200 molecules by attaching 26 different functional groups to 5 scaffolds (Figure @fig:subsituted_phenyls, A) at the X~1~ position, and then attach the 26 functional group (and H) at the X~2~ position for a total of 133 molecules per functional group (26 * 5  + 3 (for molecules with H at the X~2~ position)).
The AM1 ELF10 WBOs were calculated as described above.

We selected molecules for QC torsion scans as follows:
1. From the 26 functional groups, we only selected molecules from 18 functional groups, skipping X~1~s that either did not have a rotatable bond (fluorine, chlorine, iodine, bromine, nitrile, oxygen), were too congested (triflouromethyl, trimethylamonium) or where the WBOs on the bonds attaching X~1~ to the phenyl ring did not change much
with different chemical group at the X~2~ position (methyl).
2. For the 18 functional groups, we chose molecules that were evenly spaced along the WBO range of that functional group, up to 15 molecules.
While all the skipped functional groups for X~1~ were allowed to be at X~2~, we did not include the negative oxygen at X~2~ because OpenFF have not yet benchmarked the level of theory to use for anions.
3. After selection, we had 140 molecules that we submitted to QCArchive for both QC and MM torsion scan.
The dataset is available on QCArchive as a `TorsionDriveDataset` named `OpenFF Subsituted Phenyl Set 1`.
This dataset also includes the biphenyl torsion scans shown in Figure @fig:biphenyls.

Scripts used to generate and analyze this dataset can be found in [github.com/choderalab/fragmenter_data/phenyl_benchmark](https://github.com/choderalab/fragmenter_data/tree/master/phenyl_benchmark)

There is another subsituted phenyl set on QCArchive whose results are not shown in this paper because it was run with a different level of theory as the default OpenFF level of theory, included anions which we did not yet decide how to handle and did not have good coverage of WBO ranges.
