## Supporting Information {.page_break_before #SI}

### The Mayer bond order (MBO) extends the Wiberg bond order (WBO) to non-minimal basis sets

The WBO was developed within Pople's complete neglect of differential overlap (CNDO) formalism [@doi:10.1063/1.1701475; @doi:10/fvwkkh] and is defined as:

\begin{equation}
    W_{AB} = \sum_{\mu \in A}\sum_{\nu \in B} |D_{\mu \nu}|^2
\end{equation}{#eq:wiberg}

Where the quadradic sum of the electron density $D$ is over occupied orbitals $\mu$ and $\nu$ in atoms A and B in the bond.
However, the WBO does not extend beyond semi-empirical methods where the overlap matrix is assumed to to be diagonal.
At higher levels of QM theory where non-minimal basis sets are used, $W_{AB}$ would give values that increase in size with the basis sets so they need to normalized.
In Psi4 [@doi:10.1021/acs.jctc.7b00174], The Löwdin normalization scheme [@doi:10.1063/1.1747632] is used to calculate the WBOs.
In this scheme, the non-orthogonal basis set \bm{$\phi$} are transformed by a linear transformation \bm{$\phi$}' = $\bm{S}^{-\frac{1}{2}}\bm{\phi}$ Where \bm{$S$} is the the overlap matrix.

Mayer [@doi:10.1002/jcc.20494] incorporates \bm{$S$} directly in the bond order calculation:

\begin{equation}
    B_{AB} = \sum_{\mu \in A}\sum_{\nu \in B} (\bm{DS})_{\mu\nu} (\bm{DS})_{\nu\mu}
\end{equation}{#eq:mayer}

Where $\bm{D}$ is the density matrix for occupied orbitals for closed shell systems, and $\bm{S}$ is the overlap matrix.
This equation reduces to the WBO when orthonormalized basis sets are used.

### Comparing MBO and WBO at different levels of QC theory

Psi4 [@doi:10.1021/acs.jctc.7b00174] implements both Wiberg-Löwdin and Mayer bond orders.
Here we compare WBO and MBOs at different levels of theory.

#### Differences in conformation-dependent bond order distributions between WBO and MBO at different levels of QC theory

![**Bond order distributions for rotatable bonds over 232 conformers for Mayer and Wiberg at different levels of QM theory.**
**[A]** Gefitinb, with atoms numbered highlighted to correspond to numbers and colors on distribution plots.
**[B]** Distribution of AM1 WBOs for rotatable bonds.
**[C]** Same as **[B]** but for MBOs at HF3C.
**[D]** Same as **[B]** calculated at HF3C.
**[E]** Same as **[B]** but for MBOs at calculated at B3LYP.
**[F]** Same as **[B]** but calculated at B3LYP.](images/SI-wbo-dist.svg){#fig:wbo-mbo-comparison}

Both the WBO and MBO are functions of electron density which is conformation dependent, so they will change with conformation.
As we have shown in @fig:wbo_var_corr, conjugated bonds have higher variance than non-conjugated bonds.
Different QC methods and ways of calculating bond orders result in differences in bond order values and conformation-dependent variance.
In Figure @fig:wbo-mbo-comparison we compare AM1 [@doi:10.1021/ja00299a024] WBOs, HF-3c [@doi:10.1002/jcc.23317] MBOs and WBOs, and B3LYP(BJ)/DZVP  [@doi:10.1063/1.3382344; @doi:10.1139/v92-079; @doi:10.1063/1.464913; @doi:10.1002/jcc.21759] MBOs and WBOs.
Figure @fig:wbo-mbo-comparison **A** shows Gefitinib, a kinase inhibitors, with its rotatable bonds highlighted to correspond to the colors of the distributions shown in the other panels of Figure @fig:wbo-mbo-comparison.
The bond order distributions shown in Figure @fig:wbo-mbo-comparison were calculated over 232 Omega [@doi:10.1021/ci100031x] generated conformers of Gefitinib which were then geometry optimized with the methods used to calculate bond orders.

For AM1 we only calculated WBOs because the MBO and WBO are equivalent at that level of theory.
AM1 WBO distributions have lower variance than B3lyp for the non-conjugated bonds, but have significantly higher variance and more modes for the more conjugated bonds.

WBO and MBO distributions calculated from HF-3c optimized structures (Figure @fig:wbo-mbo-comparison **C** and **D**) had lowest variances than other QC methods.
In addition, both MBO and WBOs have similar values and shapes of their distributions.
This might be a result of HF-3c using a small, Gaussian atomic orbital (AO) basis set.
As discussed in the previous section, the MBO reduces to the WBO when orthonormalized basis AO are used. In HF-3c, a small, Gaussian basis set is used which might be the reason why the MBOs and WBOs are so similar.

When using larger basis sets (B3LYP(BJ)/DZVP), the Mayer and Wiberg bond orders differ significantly.
First, MBOs have significantly higher variance with respect to conformation.
In addition, WBO values are significantly higher than Mayer and AM1 and HF3C WBOs.
The basis sets are Löwdin normalized, but the values still seem to grow with larger basis sets.

#### Differences in conformation-dependent bond order correlation structures between WBO and MBO at different levels of QC theory

![**Bond order correlations with respect to conformations for Mayer and Wiberg at different levels of QM theory.**
**[A]** Gefitinb, with atoms numbered highlighted to correspond to numbers and colors on distribution plots.
**[B]** Pearson correlation coefficient of AM1 WBOs for every bond against every bond over 232 conformations.
**[C]** Same as **[B]** but for MBOs at HF3C.
**[D]** Same as **[B]** calculated at HF3C.
**[E]** Same as **[B]** but for MBOs at calculated at B3LYP.
**[F]** Same as **[B]** but calculated at B3LYP.](images/SI-wbo-correlations.svg){#fig:correlations}

As we have shown in Figure @fig:wbo_var_corr, conjugated systems have strongly correlated and anti-correlated bond orders with respect to conformations.
Figure @fig:correlations compares such correlation maps and their resulting structures for the bond orders calculated in Figure @fig:wbo-mbo-comparison.

Correlation plots from HF-3c MBOs and WBOs (Figures @fig:correlations **C** and **D**) have structures that are very similar to each other.
This result is similar to Figures @fig:wbo-mbo-comparison **C** and **D** where the distributions were also very similar.
However, the correlation structures of MBOs and WBOs calculated at B3LYP(BJ)/DZVP are different from each other.
MBOs show stronger correlations and anti-correlations for local conjugated systems.
For example, the bonds in the phenyl ring (alternating correlated and anti-correlated square formed by bonds 24-29) are all alternatively strongly correlated and anti-correlated.
In addition, bonds 19-23 and 23-24 are strongly correlated with each other and the quinazoline. The WBos calculated both at B3LYP(BJ)/DZVP and AM1 still show alternating correlated and anti-correlated bond orders for the phenyl ring, albeit not as strongly as seen for MBOs.
However, there is also a diffusion of the coupling to bonds outside of the phenyl ring. Bonds 24-25 and 24-29 are also coupled with quinazoline the bonds between the qunazoline and the phenyl (19-23 and 23-24).

From these results it is not clear which bond order is better at capturing electronic coupling in larger conjugated systems.
Further investigation is needed, specifically for deciding if MBO or WBO would be better at differentiating steric and resonance contributions to QC torsion scans discussed in \ref{steric-conjugation}.
It is encouraging to see that both AM1 and B3LYP(BJ)/DZVP WBOs generate such similar correlation structures.

### Supplementary Figures

![**Variance and correlations of WBO distributions with respect to conformations for a set of kinase inhibitors**
This figure shows WBO distributions and correlations for a set of kinase inhibitors calculated at B3LYP-D3(BJ) / DZVP.
Optimized conformations and their WBOs are on QCArchive (`OptimizationDataset`, named `Kinase Inhibitors: WBO Distributions`)](images/SI-KI-all.svg){#fig:kinase_inhibitors}

![**Variance and correlations of AM1 Wiberg bond order distributions with respect to conformations are higher for conjugated bonds**
The trend seen in @fig:wbo_var_corr for higher level of QC theory (B3LYP-D3(BJ) / DZVP) is also observed at AM1.
**[A]** Gifitnib with its rotatable bonds highlighted. **[B]** WBO distributions over 232 conformations of the highlighted bonds. The variance
and their 95% CI is shown. **[C]** Pearson correlation coefficients for WBOs in every bond against all other bonds with respect to conformations.](images/SI-WBO-dist.svg){#fig:si_wbo_dist}

![**Druglike molecules used to calculate ELF10 AM1 WBOs**
This set of molecules were selected to cover bonds of different types and multiplicities](images/druglike_mols_for_wbo_dist_4.svg){#fig:wbo_dist_mols}

![**Hammett parameters are anti-correlated with ELF10 WBOs**
**[A]** Hammett sigma meta parameters vs AM1 ELF10 WBOs of X~1~ meta to carboxylic acid.
 **[B]** Same as **A** but for para substituents](images/SI-hammett.svg){#fig:hammett}

![**QC torsion scans and corresponding WBOs for substituted phenyl set**
QC torsion scans, WBOs corresponding to scan and torsion barrier heights vs ELF10 WBOs for phenyl set. QC scan colors correspond to highlighted central
bonds shown on the right. The molecules are labeled with their ELF10 WBOs.](images/SI_substituted_phenyl_td_1.svg){#fig:phenyl_td_1}

![**QC torsion scans and corresponding WBOs for substituted phenyl set**
QC torsion scans, WBOs corresponding to scan and torsion barrier heights vs ELF10 WBOs for phenyl set. QC scan colors correspond to highlighted central
bonds shown on the right. The molecules are labeled with their ELF10 WBOs.](images/SI_substituted_phenyl_td_2.svg){#fig:phenyl_td_2}

![**QC torsion scans and corresponding WBOs for substituted phenyl set**
QC torsion scans, WBOs corresponding to scan and torsion barrier heights vs ELF10 WBOs for phenyl set. QC scan colors correspond to highlighted central
bonds shown on the right. The molecules are labeled with their ELF10 WBOs.](images/SI_substituted_phenyl_td_3.svg){#fig:phenyl_td_3}

![**QC torsion scans and corresponding WBOs for substituted phenyl set**
QC torsion scans, WBOs corresponding to scan and torsion barrier heights vs ELF10 WBOs for phenyl set. QC scan colors correspond to highlighted central
bonds shown on the right. The molecules are labeled with their ELF10 WBOs.](images/SI_substituted_phenyl_td_4.svg){#fig:phenyl_td_4}

![**QC torsion scans and corresponding WBOs for substituted phenyl set**
QC torsion scans, WBOs corresponding to scan and torsion barrier heights vs ELF10 WBOs for phenyl set. QC scan colors correspond to highlighted central
bonds shown on the right. The molecules are labeled with their ELF10 WBOs.](images/SI_substituted_phenyl_td_5.svg){#fig:phenyl_td_5}

